articles/robpike-response.md, before:

I'm sorry, but this post screams "boomer take" to me. As much as I am a huge fan of Go and their creators, I don't think this take makes sense. (1/4)

You're blaming college graduates for being "full-stack engineers", but the reality is that these positions didn't come from these graduates; they came from the companies that hired them. These companies decided that they needed a "full-stack" developer, and these people wanted to fulfill that role. They didn't suddenly decide to become lazy. Also, why gatekeep them from the industry just because they don't know gravitational physics? (2/4)

Also, "gravitational physics," really? One of the best things to come out of the 21st century is how accessible both technology and knowledge have become. Academia gatekeeps knowledge from those who can't afford it, and the Internet made it free and accessible. You want to know how a computer works? Here's a video on how to build an 8-bit computer from scratch with I/O! You don't have to know "gravitational physics" in order to understand how a computer works. (3/4)

While I understand (and agree to an extent) that programmers nowadays don't have as much knowledge as "engineers" as they did in the past, it's not something to complain about. It's something to celebrate. Yes, I know that the Internet is invented by people like you, but it's a tool that grew out of a need, and when there's a need, people will find a way to fill it. "Full-stack" positions grew out of a need, and people filled it. (4/4)

Commit message:

Add context to robpike-response

articles/robpike-response.md, after:

This article is a reply to
[@robpike@hachyderm.io](https://hachyderm.io/@robpike)'s
[toot](https://hachyderm.io/@robpike/109763603394772405).

I'm sorry, but this post screams "boomer take" to me. As much as I am a huge fan of Go and their creators, I don't think this take makes sense. (1/4)

You're blaming college graduates for being "full-stack engineers", but the reality is that these positions didn't come from these graduates; they came from the companies that hired them. These companies decided that they needed a "full-stack" developer, and these people wanted to fulfill that role. They didn't suddenly decide to become lazy. Also, why gatekeep them from the industry just because they don't know gravitational physics? (2/4)

Also, "gravitational physics," really? One of the best things to come out of the 21st century is how accessible both technology and knowledge have become. Academia gatekeeps knowledge from those who can't afford it, and the Internet made it free and accessible. You want to know how a computer works? Here's a video on how to build an 8-bit computer from scratch with I/O! You don't have to know "gravitational physics" in order to understand how a computer works. (3/4)

While I understand (and agree to an extent) that programmers nowadays don't have as much knowledge as "engineers" as they did in the past, it's not something to complain about. It's something to celebrate. Yes, I know that the Internet is invented by people like you, but it's a tool that grew out of a need, and when there's a need, people will find a way to fill it. "Full-stack" positions grew out of a need, and people filled it. (4/4)
