articles/silverblue-btrfs-swapfile.md, before:

# silverblue and a btrfs swapfile

quick guide on having a swapfile inside a LUKS-encrypted btrfs partition on Fedora Silverblue.

## why should i care

if you need working hibernation (i actually didn't! but i preferred doing this anyway), then a random-encrypted swap is [out of the picture](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Swap_encryption#Without_suspend-to-disk_support).

if you're like me and forgot to put btrfs inside a LVM2 before putting in LUKS, then you also won't have the luxury of having an already-encrypted swap partition.

in that case, your only viable choice left without doing partition changes to btrfs is to create a swapfile.

## in a normal world...

creating a btrfs swapfile [on something like Arch](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Btrfs#Swap_file) would be pretty simple. the workflow kinda goes like this:

```sh
sudo btrfs subvolume create /swap
sudo btrfs filesystem mkswapfile ... /swap/swapfile
```

and then you edit `/etc/fstab`. all done!

**don't actually do this**. you will break your Silverblue install.

not many people document this either; i saw a single reddit thread and they showed like half the steps and just hand-waved the `fstab` part... well, that part was why i had to recover my system like 10 times on a live Linux USB.

## the Silverblue way

first, you still need a btrfs subvolume, but **it must be in /var**. in Silverblue, `/` is a "composefs":

```
composefs on / type overlay (ro,relatime,seclabel,lowerdir+=/run/ostree/.private/cfsroot-lower,datadir+=/sysroot/ostree/repo/objects,redirect_dir=on,metacopy=on)
```

figuring out how to modify `/` is a no-go therefore, and will probably give you a headache.

to do this, do:

```sh
sudo btrfs subvolume create /var/swap
```

then create the swapfile as usual, but in this subvolume:

```sh
sudo btrfs filesystem mkswapfile /var/swap/swapfile --size 32g -U time
```

then, edit `/etc/fstab` to add the new subvolume *and* the swapfile.

to do this, first make note of what the UUID of the root mount is. in my case, it's this line:

```
UUID=3d312850-544d-4a06-a493-5a03028ed061 /         btrfs subvol=root,x-systemd.device-timeout=0,ro,compress=zstd:1,discard=async 0 0
```

duplicate this line for the swap subvolume. something like this:

```
UUID=3d312850-544d-4a06-a493-5a03028ed061 /var/swap btrfs subvol=swap,x-systemd.device-timeout=0,nofail,nodatacow,nodatasum 0 0
```

then, add the swapfile mount:

```
/var/swap/swapfile none swap defaults,nofail 0 0
```

then, reload systemd:

```sh
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

THIS STEP IS INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT. you may not be able to boot to your current build or even previous builds without it.

as a last step, to validate that everything mounts fine, do:

```sh
sudo mount -a
sudo swapon -a
```

then validate your swapfile:

```sh
sudo swapon -s
```

then, reboot and pray!

## disclaimer

i'm writing this as a post-mortem kind of doc. i did not test this out on my machine, and a lot of these commands were on the live environment that i had to use to recover my machines, so they're unfortunately long gone.

if you're worried about breaking your setup, i recommend doing one big change at a time. for example, create the subvolume, add its entry to `fstab` with a `nofail` flag, reload then reboot. repeat for the swapfile.

if everything still breaks then, don't blame me. use a better distro like NixOS.

bye!

Commit message:

fix misinformation in silverblue-btrfs-swapfile

articles/silverblue-btrfs-swapfile.md, after:

# silverblue and a btrfs swapfile

quick guide on having a swapfile inside a LUKS-encrypted btrfs partition on Fedora Silverblue.

## why should i care

if you need working hibernation (i actually didn't! but i preferred doing this anyway), then a random-encrypted swap is [out of the picture](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Swap_encryption#Without_suspend-to-disk_support).

if you're like me and forgot to put btrfs inside a LVM2 before putting in LUKS, then you also won't have the luxury of having an already-encrypted swap partition.

in that case, your only viable choice left without doing partition changes to btrfs is to create a swapfile.

## in a normal world...

creating a btrfs swapfile [on something like Arch](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Btrfs#Swap_file) would be pretty simple. the workflow kinda goes like this:

```sh
sudo btrfs subvolume create /swap
sudo btrfs filesystem mkswapfile ... /swap/swapfile
```

and then you edit `/etc/fstab`. all done!

**don't actually do this**. you will break your Silverblue install.

not many people document this either; i saw a single reddit thread and they showed like half the steps and just hand-waved the `fstab` part... well, that part was why i had to recover my system like 10 times on a live Linux USB.

## the Silverblue way

first, you still need a btrfs subvolume, but **it must be in /var**. in Silverblue, `/` is a "composefs":

```
composefs on / type overlay (ro,relatime,seclabel,lowerdir+=/run/ostree/.private/cfsroot-lower,datadir+=/sysroot/ostree/repo/objects,redirect_dir=on,metacopy=on)
```

figuring out how to modify `/` is a no-go therefore, and will probably give you a headache.

we're gonna be careful because Silverblue is basically stone-age NixOS and is very fragile, so we'll take things very slowly.

first, check what subvolumes you already have. be sure to memorize this layout and later check that you haven't destroyed anything:

```sh
sudo btrfs subvolume list /root
```

we're gonna do something a bit weird here. we'll mount our root btrfs partition *a second time* under /mnt. this is because our current root mount is incredibly messy, and `btrfs subvolume create` will behave weirdly. to do this, do:

```sh
sudo mount /dev/disk/by-uuid/3d312850-544d-4a06-a493-5a03028ed061 \
  -t btrfs \
  -o subvol=root \
  /mnt
```

you can get the `/dev/mapper` part from `lsblk`, `fdisk -l` or GNOME disks which is what i used. you're looking for the path to the btrfs partition.

also important to make sure that the `subvol` value matches with what you saw in `subvolume list` earlier.

now that `/mnt` is mounted, you may finally create the swap subvolume here:

```sh
sudo btrfs subvolume create /mnt/swap
sudo btrfs subvolume list /root # validate that a `path swap` is present
```

then create the swapfile as usual, but in this subvolume:

```sh
sudo btrfs filesystem mkswapfile /var/swap/swapfile --size 32g -U time
```

then, edit `/etc/fstab` to add the new subvolume *and* the swapfile.

to do this, first make note of what the UUID of the root mount is. in my case, it's this line:

```
UUID=3d312850-544d-4a06-a493-5a03028ed061 /         btrfs subvol=root,x-systemd.device-timeout=0,ro,compress=zstd:1,discard=async 0 0
```

duplicate this line for the swap subvolume. something like this:

```
UUID=3d312850-544d-4a06-a493-5a03028ed061 /var/swap btrfs subvol=swap,x-systemd.device-timeout=0,nofail,nodatacow,nodatasum 0 0
```

then, add the swapfile mount:

```
/var/swap/swapfile none swap defaults,nofail 0 0
```

then, reload systemd:

```sh
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

THIS STEP IS INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT. you may not be able to boot to your current build or even previous builds without it.

as a last step, to validate that everything mounts fine, do:

```sh
sudo mount -a
sudo swapon -a
```

then validate your swapfile:

```sh
sudo swapon -s
```

then, reboot and pray!

## disclaimer

i'm writing this as a post-mortem kind of doc. i did not test this out on my machine, and a lot of these commands were on the live environment that i had to use to recover my machines, so they're unfortunately long gone.

if you're worried about breaking your setup, i recommend doing one big change at a time. for example, create the subvolume, add its entry to `fstab` with a `nofail` flag, reload then reboot. repeat for the swapfile.

if everything still breaks then, don't blame me. use a better distro like NixOS.

bye!
